# Invariable generation of alternating groups

Copyright &copy; 2022 Robert Guralnick, John Shareshian, and Russ Woodroofe

This code is in support of our paper _On invariable generation of alternating groups_.

The basic idea is that if _n_ is preceded by a prime number _r_ (at most _n_-3), and _p_<sup>_a_</sup> is a prime-power divisor of _n_ so that _r_ + _p_<sup>_a_</sup> &gt; _n_, then _A_<sub>_n_</sub> is generated by any _r_ cycle together with any element of order _p_<sup>_a_</sup> having a certain cycle structure.  We use fast C code to check which _n_ in a range of integers satisfies this condition.

Certain (rare) smooth numbers do not satisfy the condition, and for these we use slower GAP code to verify more complicated number-theoretic conditions which yield similar generation condition.  For details, please see the paper.

## Instructions for use
1.  Run <code>make</code> to build.  (Requirements: [primesieve library](https://github.com/kimwalisch/primesieve))
2.  Edit <code>batchjob</code> to match the number of simultaneous jobs and the size and number of ranges to examine.  By default, it outputs to files of the form out-_num_.g in your home directory.
3.  Run <code>./batchjob</code>.  Alternatively, <code>time ./batchjob</code>.
4.  Run <code>gap</code>.
5.  <code>Read("invgen_pub.g");</code> in <code>gap</code>.
6.  <code>InvgenCheckPhaseTwoFromFilesInDirectory("~/");</code> in <code>gap</code>.

This is research software, and may require tweaking for your specific circumstances.  It has been tested on macOS and Ubuntu Linux.

## Inventory
The project consists of the following main files.
### <code>invgen_sievelp.c</code>
This C program generates a list of integers _n_ where the prime preceding _n_-2 and the largest prime-power divisor of _n_ sum to at most _n_.  Thus, it generates a list of numbers that are [smooth](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Smooth_number), relative to the [prime gap](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prime_gap) that they lie in.

The resulting command-line tool takes two arguments, which specify the first and last numbers in a range of positive integers.

The output is a GAP readable file, which sets variable <code>invgen_oversmooth_range</code> to the range of integers considered, and variable <code>invgen_oversmooth</code> to a list of entries of the form [_n_, _p_<sup>_a_</sup>], where _n_ is a smooth number and _p_<sup>_a_</sup> is the largest prime-power divisor of _n_.

### <code>batchjob</code>
This bash script runs a configurable number of parallel instances of <code>invgen_sievelp</code>, covering some given range.  It should be edited before a computation.  The variable <code>INVGEN_CHUNKSIZE</code> holds the size of each range, <code>INVGEN_STOPSTEP</code> holds the largest multiple of the chunk size to compute out to, and <code>INVGEN_NUMJOBS</code> holds the maximum number of simutaneous jobs to run.

The script is relatively unsophisticated, and waits for all current jobs to complete before beginning new ones.

### <code>invgen_pub.g</code>
This family of GAP functions has several functions.  The most important function is:
##### <code>InvgenCheckPhaseTwoFromFilesInDirectory</code>

Given a directory, this function looks for files matching the wildcard <code>out-\*.g</code> or <code>out-\*.g.gz</code>, which it expects to be output from <code>invgen_sievelp</code>.  It checks that the alternating group at each _n_ given is generated by any two element having certain cycles structures (where one such element has prime order, the other prime-power order).

Also of note: <code>InvgenCheckInRange</code> is slower GAP code to check the same condition as in <code>invgen_sievelp</code>, together with the "Phase 2" check.  Several other functions work together to implement a [segmented sieve of Eratosthenes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sieve_of_Eratosthenes#Segmented_sieve).
